[docs] Simplify loading guide (#2694)
huggingface/diffusers: docs/source/en/using-diffusers/loading.mdx

specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
-->

# Load pipelines, models, and schedulers

Everything you need for inference or training is accessible with the `from_pretrained()` method, giving you the flexibility to load complete pipelines or the building blocks to assemble your own diffusion system.

This guide will show you how to load:

> - pipelines from the Hub and locally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Pipelines from the Hub and locally
```

stable_diffusion_txt2img = StableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(model_id)

components = stable_diffusion_txt2img.components

# weights are not reloaded into RAM
stable_diffusion_img2img = StableDiffusionImg2ImgPipeline(**components)
```

> Note how the above code snippet makes use of [`DiffusionPipeline.components`].

Reviewer 2: Wait why do you want to remove this here?

Both use cases have clear advantages when their weights are considered variants: they share the same serialization format as the reference weights, and they correspond to a specialization of the "main" checkpoint which does not warrant a new model repository. 
A checkpoint stored in [torch's half-precision / float16 format](https://pytorch.org/blog/accelerating-training-on-nvidia-gpus-with-pytorch-automatic-mixed-precision/) requires only half the bandwith and storage when downloading the checkpoint,
**but** cannot be used when continuing training or when running the checkpoint on CPU.
Similarly the *non-exponential-averaged* (or non-EMA) version of the checkpoint should be used when continuing fine-tuning of the model checkpoint, **but** should not be used when using the checkpoint for inference. 

#### How to save and load variants

Saving a diffusion pipeline as a variant can be done by providing [`DiffusionPipeline.save_pretrained`] with the `variant` argument. 

> The `variant` extends the weight name by the provided variation, by changing the default weight name from `diffusion_pytorch_model.bin` to `diffusion_pytorch_model.{variant}.bin` or from `diffusion_pytorch_model.safetensors` to `diffusion_pytorch_model.{variant}.safetensors`. By doing so, one creates a variant of the pipeline checkpoint that can be loaded **instead** of the "main" pipeline checkpoint.

Author: Why doesn't the `runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5` fp16 unet [checkpoint](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5/tree/fp16/unet) have the `variant` in the weight name?

Reviewer 2: I think we're at a stage where we can/should add it. Will upload all the variants this week

Let's have a look at how we could create a float16 variant of a pipeline. First, we load 
the "main" variant of a checkpoint (stored in `float32` precision) into mixed precision format, using `torch_dtype=torch.float16`.
Then you can pass the `components` to another pipeline without reloading the weights into RAM:

```py
from diffusers import DiffusionPipeline
import torch

pipe = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5", torch_dtype=torch.float16)
```

Now all model components of the pipeline are stored in half-precision dtype. We can now save the 
pipeline under a `"fp16"` variant as follows:

```py
pipe.save_pretrained("./stable-diffusion-v1-5", variant="fp16")
```

> If we don't save into an existing `stable-diffusion-v1-5` folder the new folder would look as follows:

Author: Does this mean you should save it into an existing folder or repository like `runway/stable-diffusion-v1-5` for example?

Reviewer: If we are saving it locally (which is what `save_pretrained()` is doing), then how would it matter?

Reviewer 3: I was confused when I was reading this part too!

I think what he meant might be that you should save it into a new folder in order to follow this particular example (not because it is better to save it into a new folder)

-i.e. if you save it into an existing folder instead, the folder structure will look different than what's show below (it will contain both  .fp16.bin extension and .bin., not just fp16.bin) and you will NOT get an Exception error if you load without `variant` argument

```
stable-diffusion-v1-5
├── feature_extractor
│   └── preprocessor_config.json
├── model_index.json
├── safety_checker
│   ├── config.json
│   └── pytorch_model.fp16.bin
├── scheduler
│   └── scheduler_config.json
├── text_encoder
│   ├── config.json
│   └── pytorch_model.fp16.bin
├── tokenizer
│   ├── merges.txt
│   ├── special_tokens_map.json
│   ├── tokenizer_config.json
│   └── vocab.json
├── unet
│   ├── config.json
│   └── diffusion_pytorch_model.fp16.bin
└── vae
    ├── config.json
    └── diffusion_pytorch_model.fp16.bin
```

As one can see, all model files now have a `.fp16.bin` extension instead of just `.bin`.
The variant now has to be loaded by also passing a `variant="fp16"` to [`DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained`], e.g.:

```py

> DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("./stable-diffusion-v1-5", variant="fp16", torch_dtype=torch.float16)

Author: Do you need to specify `torch_dtype=torch.float16` if you're already specifying the `variant=fp16` or is this just the case because you don't have the `main` checkpoints saved here?

Reviewer 2: You need to specify it - these are two different things

- Non-exponential mean averaged (EMA) weights which shouldn't be used for inference. You should use these to continue finetuning a model.

<Tip>

💡 When the checkpoints have identical model structures, but they were trained on different datasets and with a different training setup, they should be stored in separate repositories instead of variations (for example, [`stable-diffusion-v1-4`] and [`stable-diffusion-v1-5`]).

</Tip>

Otherwise, a variant is **identical** to the original checkpoint. They have exactly the same serialization format (like [Safetensors](./using-diffusers/using_safetensors)), model structure, and weights have identical tensor shapes.

| **checkpoint type** | **weight name**                     | **argument for loading weights** |
|---------------------|-------------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| original            | diffusion_pytorch_model.bin         |                                  |
| floating point      | diffusion_pytorch_model.fp16.bin    | `variant`, `torch_dtype`         |
| non-EMA             | diffusion_pytorch_model.non_ema.bin | `variant`                        |

> Load a variant by specifying the `variant` argument in [`DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained`], and the `torch_dtype` if the variant is a different floating point type. 🧨 Diffusers won't download a variant unless it is explicitly specified, so you don't have to worry about downloading and caching more checkpoints than you need.

Reviewer 2: Here we need to be more precise I think.

`variant` -> this just defines what files should be loaded
`torch_dtype` -> this defines into what `torch_dtype` the weights should be converted to. 

Can we maybe try to say something along the following:
```suggestion
Load a variant by specifying the `variant` argument in [`DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained`]. 🧨 Diffusers won't download a variant unless it is explicitly specified, so you don't have to worry about unnecessarily downloading and caching more checkpoints than you need.

 The `torch_dtype` argument is unrelated to the `variant` argument and decides which floating point precision the loaded checkpoints should have. If you want to save bandwidth by loading a `"fp16"` variant, you should also define `torch_dtype=torch.float16` as otherwise the fp16 weights will be converted to the default fp32 precision. Note that you can also load the original checkpoint without setting a variant and then converting it to float16 precision by passing `torch_dtype=torch.float16`. In this case you downloaded float32 weights and converted them to float16 after loading.
```

Reviewer 2: It would be great if the reader could understand the difference between `torch_dtype` and `variant` here (they are completely orthogonal.

Author: Thanks for the explanation, this is super helpful!
